Astronomical Implications of Machine Learning

Arun Debray
Jay Patel
Raymond Wu

Astronomy is a natural target application of machine learning in that telescopes typically generate huge amounts of data that can be sorted and classified programatically. However, the data doesn't lend itself to straightforward sorting: the vast majority of it is stored as raw image data, lightcurves, or tables, which obscures information that people can more easily understand, such as whether a star is a variable star, what kind of galaxy is in a given image, etc. This makes automatic classification of astronomical objects more difficult than it might first appear.

One way to handle this is to crowdsource this classification. The Galaxy Zoo project (http://www.galaxyzoo.org/) allows many small contributors to collectively classify a large number of galaxies previously untouched by researchers. A related project, Planet Hunters (http://www.planethunters.org/), encourages users to sift through the Kepler telescope's data to discover transits missed by researchers or computer programs.

The Kepler telescope's goal is to find planets around other stars, which are referred to as extrasolar planets or exoplanets. Most exoplanets cannot be detected directly, because they are so dim relative to their parent stars; thus, any light from the planet will get lost in that of the star. Thus, a variety of indirect techniques have been developed; Kepler in particular looks for planetary transits, where a planet passes between its star and the Earth, decreasing the observed luminosity of the star by a small, but detectable, amount. Typically, this dip is seen through a lightcurve, which is a graph of the observed brightness over time. Small, periodic dips in the curve can indicate a planetary system.

Our goal is to use machine learning in place of crowdsourcing. Specifically, we intend to create a classifier for lightcurves of stars, indicating whether such a star is likely to harbor planets. Ideally, the algorithm could also predict some characteristics of the planets it reports, but there may not be enough data to accomplish this. The classifier will have to differentiate between the several potential causes of an anomalous lightcurve: inherent variability of the star, a stellar binary system, or an actual transiting exoplanet. We plan to train this classifier by using existing transit data from some confirmed exoplanets reported by Kepler and other projects, along with stars known to be variable, binary systems, or planetless, and then testing it on some of or all of Kepler's data. If this classifier detects a similar set of stars to that of Planet Hunters' users, it would demonstrate its potential use as a classifier for lightcurve data, but it would be even better if it were to correctly report lightcurves they didn't notice, which could correspond to undiscovered planets.
